=head1 NAME

perlbook - Perl book information

=head1 DESCRIPTION

You can order Perl books from O'Reilly & Associates, 1-800-998-9938.
Local/overseas is 1-707-829-0515.  If you can locate an O'Reilly order
form, you can also fax to 1-707-829-0104.  Programming Perl is a
reference work that covers nearly all of Perl, while Learning Perl is a
tutorial that covers the most frequently used subset of the language.

    Programming Perl (the Camel Book):
	ISBN 0-937175-64-1	(English)
	ISBN 4-89052-384-7	(Japanese)

    Learning Perl (the Llama Book):
	ISBN 1-56592-042-2	(English)

=head2 Camel Book Errata and Addenda

The first edition of the Perl book, I<Programming Perl>, has the
following omissions and goofs.

On page 5, the examples which read

    eval "/usr/bin/perl

should read

    eval "exec /usr/bin/perl

On page 195, the equivalent to the System V sum program only works for
very small files.  To do larger files, use

    undef $/;
    $checksum = unpack("%32C*",<>) % 65535;

The descriptions of alarm and sleep refer to signal SIGALARM.  These
should refer to SIGALRM.

The B<-0> switch to set the initial value of $/ was added to Perl after
the book went to press.

The B<-l> switch now does automatic line ending processing.

The qx// construct is now a synonym for backticks.

$0 may now be assigned to set the argument displayed by I<ps>(1).

The new @###.## format was omitted accidentally from the description on
formats.

It wasn't known at press time that s///ee caused multiple evaluations
of the replacement expression.  This is to be construed as a feature.

(LIST) x $count now does array replication.

There is now no limit on the number of parentheses in a regular
expression.

In double-quote context, more escapes are supported: \e, \a, \x1b, \c[,
\l, \L, \u, \U, \E.  The latter five control up/lower case
translation.

The B<$/> variable may now be set to a multi-character delimiter.

There is now a g modifier on ordinary pattern matching that causes it
to iterate through a string finding multiple matches.

All of the $^X variables are new except for $^T.

The default top-of-form format for FILEHANDLE is now FILEHANDLE_TOP
rather than top.

The eval {} and sort {} constructs were added in version 4.018.

The v and V (little-endian) template options for pack and unpack were
added in 4.019.

